I'm Norman Wildberger, and I'm excited to
introduce to you a new approach to arithmetic
where we incorporate some of our understanding
of the importance of the data structure called
a multi-set and combine it with interesting
insights from 20th-century physics to form a
very viable, possible new alternative to
the foundational aspects of arithmetic,
which underlies most of modern mathematics.
Today, I want to talk a little bit about an
overview of the role of arithmetic historically,
painting things with a very broad brush and just
giving you a sense of where we are going to go.
Arithmetic has been around, of course, for a long
time, initially associated perhaps with commerce,
accounting, or taxation issues in ancient
civilizations. While pure mathematics was
more interested in issues having to do with
astronomy and related geometrical considerations,
as evidenced by Euclid's foundational text, the
Elements, which is very much based on geometry,
there are a few chapters dedicated to rather
esoteric number-theoretical considerations,
such as perfect numbers, triangular numbers,
primes, and factorizations. These are, of course,
very important and ultimately lead to
Diophantine equations and things like that,
but they are perhaps of more academic interest
and not firmly grounded in applied mathematics.
The situation really changes when Descartes comes
along and introduces his Cartesian approach to
geometry, trying to clarify the definitional
difficulties with Euclid's geometry by firmly
establishing everything in the context of a prior
number system, giving us coordinates over the
plane or in higher dimensions of space.
We start with the underlying arithmetic,
perhaps rational numbers or something else,
and then we build a geometry on top of that
by essentially creating a linear space whose
points are given by n-tuples of our numbers.
When people did this and looked carefully, they
saw that various intuitive geometrical notions,
primarily length and area, often required an
extension or a seeming extension of our number
system beyond the familiar rational number
system, even going back to the Pythagorean
conundrum with the square root of 2 as
the length of a diagonal of a unit square.
People started to realize that for a lot
of geometrical purposes, if we want to get
something that mimics our intuition, then
we are forced to extend our number system
in particular ways. This wasn't really clearly
encoded until the 19th century when analysts,
who were interested in trying to establish
function theory, also started requiring a
more careful view of what the artificial
underlying number system was. Ultimately,
this culminated in the current theory
of real numbers, around the time of
Cauchy, Dedekind, and Weierstrass, and was
supported principally by Cantor's so-called
theory of infinite sets, even though
that was highly debated at the time.
When the 20th century came along, the difficulties
with the foundations of set theory had been
circumvented a little bit by adopting a
philosophical point of view. From my point
of view, it sort of delegated the foundations
of mathematics to the philosophers with this
axiomatic approach to set theory. This then became
the default starting point for arithmetic also,
and because set theory is, in my view, rather
a suspect subject and cannot actually be very
clearly laid out, it meant that the foundations of
arithmetic were concurrently imbued with a shaky,
murky, shimmering aspect. When we go to say
von Neumann and his attempt to pin down even
the basics of integer arithmetic or natural
numbers from a set theory point of view,
there is something a little bit forced about that,
I think it's fair to say, a little bit artificial.
But mathematicians have felt that there's
no real alternative because we've all agreed
that set theory is the proper foundation
of mathematics, and therefore by default,
it's the natural place to look at for
the foundations of arithmetic as well.
Because I'm not a believer in Zermelo-Fraenkel
axiomatics, I don't think axiomatics should
play any kind of role in the foundations of
analysis, calculus, or even arithmetic. I'm
looking for alternative ways, and it's my
firm view that the crucial data structure
is not that of a set as far as the foundations of
arithmetic go, but actually the multi-set. This
is one very clear distinction between what I'm
proposing and what everybody else is thinking.
For me, it's the multi-sets that provide the
arena where we can really have a rich arithmetic.
That's one of the key starting points. We're
going to be developing arithmetic from very
first principles just by thinking about multi-sets
and what we can do with them from a very naive
point of view. A little bit down the road, when
we start thinking about making the transition
from natural number arithmetic to integer
arithmetic, we're going to see that we have
to start thinking in a way that's outside
the usual formats of modern mathematics
and drawing inspiration from the physicists,
in particular from Paul Dirac's remarkable
discovery of the equation of the electron
and concurrent particle-antiparticle duality.
The subject that's going to be emerging here,
although initially we'll be framing it in
terms of multi-sets, is ultimately going to be
called "box arithmetic." It will be, I think,
a very novel place and an opportunity
to rethink all kinds of things and to
put mathematics on a much wider and more
interesting foundation. We're going to
see that arithmetic actually extends far
beyond what we currently think it does.
Another one of my main motivations is
to ultimately connect our subject much
more explicitly and directly
with computational reality.
For me, this is the litmus test of whether
our pronouncements and discussions actually
correspond to something real. Ultimately, we
want to be able to illustrate what we're doing
so explicitly, so concretely, so precisely that a
computer can do it. This, of course, removes from
consideration so much of modern 20th-century-style
infinite analyses. I think we have to let go of
that, people. We have to let go of that and move
into a much clearer, much more concise, and much
more logical approach that is firmly and
always connected with computational reality.
A big adventure is about to start for us, with
lots of opportunities for thinking outside the box
with box arithmetic. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.